<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X: A Forced Interview</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">A Forced Interview</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">(Tuesday, September 11; 8 <abbr>p.m.</abbr>)</p>
			</header>
			<p>Markham dined at the Stuyvesant Club, as was his custom, and at his invitation Vance and I remained with him. He no doubt figured that our presence at the dinner-table would act as a bulwark against the intrusion of casual acquaintances; for he was in no mood for the pleasantries of the curious. Rain had begun to fall late in the afternoon, and when dinner was over it had turned into a steady downpour which threatened to last well into the night. Dinner over, the three of us sought a secluded corner of the lounge-room, and settled ourselves for a protracted smoke.</p>
			<p>We had been there less than a quarter of an hour when a slightly rotund man, with a heavy, florid face and thin gray hair, strolled up to us with a stealthy, self-assured gait, and wished Markham a jovial good evening. Though I had not met the newcomer I knew him to be Charles Cleaver.</p>
			<p>“Got your note at the desk saying you wanted to see me.” He spoke with a voice curiously gentle for a man of his size; but, for all its gentleness, there was in it a timbre of calculation and coldness.</p>
			<p>Markham rose and, after shaking hands, introduced him to Vance and me⁠—though, it seemed, Vance had known him slightly for some time. He took the chair Markham indicated, and, producing a Corona Corona, he carefully cut the end with a gold clipper attached to his heavy watch-chain, rolled the cigar between his lips to dampen it, and lighted it in closely cupped hands.</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry to trouble you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cleaver,” began Markham, “but, as you probably have read, a young woman by the name of Margaret Odell was murdered last night in her apartment in 71st Street.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He paused. He seemed to be considering just how he could best broach a subject so obviously delicate; and perhaps he hoped that Cleaver would volunteer the fact of his acquaintance with the girl. But not a muscle of the man’s face moved; and, after a moment, Markham continued.</p>
			<p>“In making inquiries into the young woman’s life I learned that you, among others, were fairly well acquainted with her.”</p>
			<p>Again he paused. Cleaver lifted his eyebrows almost imperceptibly, but said nothing.</p>
			<p>“The fact is,” went on Markham, a trifle annoyed by the other’s deliberately circumspect attitude, “my report states that you were seen with her on many occasions during a period of nearly two years. Indeed, the only inference to be drawn from what I’ve learned is that you were more than casually interested in Miss Odell.”</p>
			<p>“Yes?” The query was as noncommittal as it was gentle.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” repeated Markham. “And I may add, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cleaver, that this is not the time for pretenses or suppressions. I am talking to you tonight, in large measure <i xml:lang="la">ex officio</i>, because it occurred to me that you could give me some assistance in clearing the matter up. I think it only fair to say that a certain man is now under grave suspicion, and we hope to arrest him very soon. But, in any event, we will need help, and that is why I requested this little chat with you at the club.”</p>
			<p>“And how can I assist you?” Cleaver’s face remained blank; only his lips moved as he put the question.</p>
			<p>“Knowing this young woman as well as you did,” explained Markham patiently, “you are no doubt in possession of some information⁠—certain facts or confidences, let us say⁠—which would throw light on her brutal, and apparently unexpected, murder.”</p>
			<p>Cleaver was silent for some time. His eyes had shifted to the wall before him, but otherwise his features remained set.</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid I can’t accommodate you,” he said at length.</p>
			<p>“Your attitude is not quite what might be expected in one whose conscience is entirely clear,” returned Markham, with a show of resentment.</p>
			<p>The man turned a mildly inquisitive gaze upon the District Attorney.</p>
			<p>“What has my knowing the girl to do with her being murdered? She didn’t confide in me who her murderer was to be. She didn’t even tell me that she knew anyone who intended to strangle her. If she’d known, she most likely could have avoided being murdered.”</p>
			<p>Vance was sitting close to me, a little removed from the others, and, leaning over, murmured in my ear <i xml:lang="it">sotto voce</i>:</p>
			<p>“Markham’s up against another lawyer⁠—poor dear!⁠ ⁠… A crumplin’ situation.”</p>
			<p>But however inauspiciously this interlocutory skirmish may have begun, it soon developed into a grim combat which ended in Cleaver’s complete surrender. Markham, despite his suavity and graciousness, was an unrelenting and resourceful antagonist; and it was not long before he had forced from Cleaver some highly significant information.</p>
			<p>In response to the man’s ironically evasive rejoinder, he turned quickly and leaned forward.</p>
			<p>“You’re not on the witness-stand in your own defense, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cleaver,” he said sharply, “however much you appear to regard yourself as eligible for that position.”</p>
			<p>Cleaver glared back fixedly without replying; and Markham, his eyelids level, studied the man opposite, determined to decipher all he could from the other’s phlegmatic countenance. But Cleaver was apparently just as determined that his vis-à-vis should decipher absolutely nothing; and the features that met Markham’s scrutiny were as arid as a desert. At length Markham sank back in his chair.</p>
			<p>“It doesn’t matter particularly,” he remarked indifferently, “whether you discuss the matter or not here in the club tonight. If you prefer to be brought to my office in the morning by a sheriff with a subpœna, I’ll be only too glad to accommodate you.”</p>
			<p>“That’s up to you,” Cleaver told him hostilely.</p>
			<p>“And what’s printed in the newspapers about it will be up to the reporters,” rejoined Markham. “I’ll explain the situation to them and give them a verbatim report of the interview.”</p>
			<p>“But I’ve nothing to tell you.” The other’s tone was suddenly conciliatory; the idea of publicity was evidently highly distasteful to him.</p>
			<p>“So you informed me before,” said Markham coldly. “Therefore I wish you good evening.”</p>
			<p>He turned to Vance and me with the air of a man who had terminated an unpleasant episode.</p>
			<p>Cleaver, however, made no move to go. He smoked thoughtfully for a minute or two; then he gave a short, hard laugh which did not even disturb the contours of his face.</p>
			<p>“Oh, hell!” he grumbled, with forced good nature. “As you said, I’m not on the witness-stand.⁠ ⁠… What do you want to know?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve told you the situation.” Markham’s voice betrayed a curious irritation. “You know the sort of thing I want. How did this Odell girl live? Who were her intimates? Who would have been likely to want her out of the way? What enemies had she?⁠—Anything that might lead us to an explanation of her death.⁠ ⁠… And incidentally,” he added with tartness, “anything that’ll eliminate yourself from any suspected participation, direct or indirect, in the affair.”</p>
			<p>Cleaver stiffened at these last words, and started to protest indignantly. But immediately he changed his tactics. Smiling contemptuously, he took out a leather pocket-case and, extracting a small folded paper, handed it to Markham.</p>
			<p>“I can eliminate myself easily enough,” he proclaimed, with easy confidence. “There’s a speeding summons from Boonton, New Jersey. Note the date and the time: September the 10th⁠—last night⁠—at half past eleven. Was driving down to Hopatcong, and was ticketed by a motorcycle cop just as I had passed Boonton and was heading for Mountain Lakes. Got to appear in court there tomorrow morning. Damn nuisance, these country constables.” He gave Markham a long, calculating look. “You couldn’t square it for me, could you? It’s a rotten ride to Jersey, and I’ve got a lot to do tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>Markham, who had inspected the summons casually, put it in his pocket.</p>
			<p>“I’ll attend to it for you,” he promised, smiling amiably. “Now tell me what you know.”</p>
			<p>Cleaver puffed meditatively on his cigar. Then, leaning back and crossing his knees, he spoke with apparent candor.</p>
			<p>“I doubt if I know much that’ll help you.⁠ ⁠… I liked the Canary, as she was called⁠—in fact, was pretty much attached to her at one time. Did a number of foolish things; wrote her a lot of damn-fool letters when I went to Cuba last year. Even had my picture taken with her down at Atlantic City.” He made a self-condemnatory grimace. “Then she began to get cool and distant; broke several appointments with me. I raised the devil with her, but the only answer I got was a demand for money.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He stopped and looked down at his cigar ash. A venomous hatred gleamed from his narrowed eyes, and the muscles of his jowls hardened.</p>
			<p>“No use lying about it. She had those letters and things, and she touched me for a neat little sum before I got ’em back.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“When was this?”</p>
			<p>There was a momentary hesitation. “Last June,” Cleaver replied. Then he hurried on: “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Markham”⁠—his voice was bitter⁠—“I don’t want to throw mud on a dead person; but that woman was the shrewdest, coldest-blooded blackmailer it’s ever been my misfortune to meet. And I’ll say this, too: I wasn’t the only easy mark she squeezed. She had others on her string.⁠ ⁠… I happen to know she once dug into old Louey Mannix for a plenty⁠—he told me about it.”</p>
			<p>“Could you give me the names of any of these other men?” asked Markham, attempting to dissemble his eagerness. “I’ve already heard of the Mannix episode.”</p>
			<p>“No, I couldn’t.” Cleaver spoke regretfully. “I’ve seen the Canary here and there with different men; and there’s one in particular I’ve noticed lately. But they were all strangers to me.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose the Mannix affair is dead and buried by this time?”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—ancient history. You won’t get any line on the situation from that angle. But there are others⁠—more recent than Mannix⁠—who might bear looking into, if you could find them. I’m easygoing myself; take things as they come. But there’s a lot of men who’d go redheaded if she did the things to them that she did to me.”</p>
			<p>Cleaver, despite his confession, did not strike me as easygoing, but rather as a cold, self-contained, nerveless person whose immobility was at all times dictated by policy and expediency.</p>
			<p>Markham studied him closely.</p>
			<p>“You think, then, her death may have been due to vengeance on the part of some disillusioned admirer?”</p>
			<p>Cleaver carefully considered his answer.</p>
			<p>“Seems reasonable,” he said finally. “She was riding for a fall.”</p>
			<p>There was a short silence; then Markham asked:</p>
			<p>“Do you happen to know of a young man she was interested in⁠—good-looking, small, blond moustache, light blue eyes⁠—named Skeel?”</p>
			<p>Cleaver snorted derisively.</p>
			<p>“That wasn’t the Canary’s specialty⁠—she let the young ones alone, as far as I know.”</p>
			<p>At this moment a pageboy approached Cleaver, and bowed.</p>
			<p>“Sorry to disturb you, sir, but there’s a phone call for your brother. Party said it was important and, as your brother isn’t in the club now, the operator thought you might know where he’d gone.”</p>
			<p>“How would I know?” fumed Cleaver. “Don’t ever bother me with his calls.”</p>
			<p>“Your brother in the city?” asked Markham casually. “I met him years ago. He’s a San Franciscan, isn’t he?”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—rabid Californian. He’s visiting New York for a couple of weeks so he’ll appreciate Frisco more when he gets back.”</p>
			<p>It seemed to me that this information was given reluctantly; and I got the impression that Cleaver, for some reason, was annoyed. But Markham, apparently, was too absorbed in the problem before him to take notice of the other’s disgruntled air, for he reverted at once to the subject of the murder.</p>
			<p>“I happen to know one man who has been interested in the Odell woman recently; he may be the same one you’ve seen her with⁠—tall, about forty-five, and wears a gray, close-cropped moustache.” (He was, I knew, describing Spotswoode.)</p>
			<p>“That’s the man,” averred Cleaver. “Saw them together only last week at Mouquin’s.”</p>
			<p>Markham was disappointed.</p>
			<p>“Unfortunately, he’s checked off the list.⁠ ⁠… But there must be somebody who was in the girl’s confidence. You’re sure you couldn’t cudgel your brains to any advantage?”</p>
			<p>Cleaver appeared to think.</p>
			<p>“If it’s merely a question of someone who had her confidence,” he said, “I might suggest Doctor Lindquist⁠—first name’s Ambroise, I think; and he lives somewhere in the Forties near Lexington Avenue. But I don’t know that he’d be of any value to you. Still, he was pretty close to her at one time.”</p>
			<p>“You mean that this Doctor Lindquist might have been interested in her otherwise than professionally?”</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t like to say.” Cleaver smoked for a while as if inwardly debating the situation. “Anyway, here are the facts: Lindquist is one of these exclusive society specialists⁠—a neurologist he calls himself⁠—and I believe he’s the head of a private sanitarium of some kind for nervous women. He must have money, and, of course, his social standing is a vital asset to him⁠—just the sort of man the Canary might have selected as a source of income. And I know this: he came to see her a good deal oftener than a doctor of his type would be apt to. I ran into him one night at her apartment, and when she introduced us, he wasn’t even civil.”</p>
			<p>“It will at least bear looking into,” replied Markham unenthusiastically. “You’ve no one else in mind who might know something helpful?”</p>
			<p>Cleaver shook his head.</p>
			<p>“No⁠—no one.”</p>
			<p>“And she never mentioned anything to you that indicated she was in fear of anyone, or anticipated trouble?”</p>
			<p>“Not a word. Fact is, I was bowled over by the news. I never read any paper but the morning <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>⁠—except, of course, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Daily Racing Form</i> at night. And as there was no account of the murder in this morning’s paper, I didn’t hear about it until just before dinner. The boys in the billiard-room were talking about it, and I went out and looked at an afternoon paper. If it hadn’t been for that, I might not have known of it till tomorrow morning.”</p>
			<p>Markham discussed the case with him until half past eight, but could elicit no further suggestions. Finally Cleaver rose to go.</p>
			<p>“Sorry I couldn’t give you more help,” he said. His rubicund face was beaming now, and he shook hands with Markham in the friendliest fashion.</p>
			<p>“You wangled that viscid old sport rather cleverly, don’t y’ know,” remarked Vance, when Cleaver had gone. “But there’s something deuced queer about him. The transition from his gambler’s glassy stare to his garrulous confidences was too sudden⁠—suspiciously sudden, in fact. I may be evil-minded, but he didn’t impress me as a luminous pillar of truth. Maybe it’s because I don’t like those cold, boiled eyes of his⁠—somehow they didn’t harmonize with his gushing imitation of openhearted frankness.”</p>
			<p>“We can allow him something for his embarrassing position,” suggested Markham charitably. “It isn’t exactly pleasant to admit having been taken in and blackmailed by a charmer.”</p>
			<p>“Still, if he got his letters back in June, why did he continue paying court to the lady? Heath reported he was active in that sector right up to the end.”</p>
			<p>“He may be the complete amorist,” smiled Markham.</p>
			<p>“Some like Abra, what?⁠⸺⁠</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>‘Abra was ready ere I call’d her name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though I call’d another, Abra came.’</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Maybe⁠—yes. He might qualify as a modern Cayley Drummle.”</p>
			<p>“At any rate, he gave us, in Doctor Lindquist, a possible source of information.”</p>
			<p>“Quite so,” agreed Vance. “And that’s about the only point of his whole passionate unfoldment that I particularly put any stock in, because it was the only point he indicated with any decent reticence.⁠ ⁠… My advice is that you interview this Æsculapius of the fair sex without further delay.”</p>
			<p>“I’m dog-tired,” objected Markham. “Let it wait till tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>Vance glanced at the great clock over the stone mantel.</p>
			<p>“It’s latish, I’ll admit, but why not, as Pittacus advised, seize time by the forelock?</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>‘Who lets slip fortune, her shall never find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Occasion once past by, is bald behind.’</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">But the elder Cato anticipated Cowley. In his ‘Disticha de Moribus’ he wrote: <i xml:lang="la">Fronte capillata</i>⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Come!” pleaded Markham, rising. “Anything to dam this flow of erudition.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
