<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Characters of the Book</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="characters" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2>Characters of the Book</h2>
			<dl>
				<dt>Philo Vance</dt>
				<dt>John F.-X. Markham</dt>
				<dd>District Attorney of New York County.</dd>
				<dt>Margaret Odell (The “Canary”)</dt>
				<dd>Famous Broadway beauty and ex-<i>Follies</i> girl, who was mysteriously murdered in her apartment.</dd>
				<dt>Amy Gibson</dt>
				<dd>Margaret Odell’s maid.</dd>
				<dt>Charles Cleaver</dt>
				<dd>A man-about-town.</dd>
				<dt>Kenneth Spotswoode</dt>
				<dd>A manufacturer.</dd>
				<dt>Louis Mannix</dt>
				<dd>An importer.</dd>
				<dt><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ambroise Lindquist</dt>
				<dd>A fashionable neurologist.</dd>
				<dt>Tony Skeel</dt>
				<dd>A professional burglar.</dd>
				<dt>William Elmer Jessup</dt>
				<dd>Telephone operator.</dd>
				<dt>Harry Spively</dt>
				<dd>Telephone operator.</dd>
				<dt>Alys La Fosse</dt>
				<dd>A musical-comedy actress.</dd>
				<dt>Wiley Allen</dt>
				<dd>A gambler.</dd>
				<dt>Potts</dt>
				<dd>A street-cleaner.</dd>
				<dt>Amos Feathergill</dt>
				<dd>Assistant District Attorney.</dd>
				<dt>William M. Moran</dt>
				<dd>Commanding Officer of the Detective Bureau.</dd>
				<dt>Ernest Heath</dt>
				<dd>Sergeant of the Homicide Bureau.</dd>
				<dt>Snitkin</dt>
				<dd>Detective of the Homicide Bureau.</dd>
				<dt>Guilfoyle</dt>
				<dd>Detective of the Homicide Bureau.</dd>
				<dt>Burke</dt>
				<dd>Detective of the Homicide Bureau.</dd>
				<dt>Tracy</dt>
				<dd>Detective assigned to District Attorney’s office.</dd>
				<dt>Deputy-Inspector Conrad Brenner</dt>
				<dd>Burglar-tools expert.</dd>
				<dt>Captain Dubois</dt>
				<dd>Finger-print expert.</dd>
				<dt>Detective Bellamy</dt>
				<dd>Finger-print expert.</dd>
				<dt>Peter Quackenbush</dt>
				<dd>Official photographer.</dd>
				<dt><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Doremus</dt>
				<dd>Medical Examiner.</dd>
				<dt>Swacker</dt>
				<dd>Secretary to the District Attorney.</dd>
				<dt>Currie</dt>
				<dd>Vance’s valet.</dd>
			</dl>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
