<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Characters of the Book</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Characters of the Book</h2>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Philo Vance.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>John <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.-X.</abbr> Markham. District Attorney of New York County.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Margaret Odell (The “Canary”). Famous Broadway beauty and ex-Follies girl, who was mysteriously murdered in her apartment.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Amy Gibson. Margaret Odell’s maid.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Charles Cleaver. A man-about-town.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Kenneth Spotswoode. A manufacturer.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Louis Mannix. An importer.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Ambroise Lindquist. A fashionable neurologist.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Tony Skeel. A professional burglar.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>William Elmer Jessup. Telephone operator.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Harry Spively. Telephone operator.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Alys La Fosse. A musical-comedy actress.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Wiley Allen. A gambler.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Potts. A street-cleaner.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Amos Feathergill. Assistant District Attorney.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>William <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Moran. Commanding Officer of the Detective Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Ernest Heath. Sergeant of the Homicide Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Snitkin. Detective of the Homicide Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Guilfoyle. Detective of the Homicide Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Burke. Detective of the Homicide Bureau.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Tracy. Detective assigned to District Attorney’s office.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Deputy-Inspector Conrad Brenner. Burglar-tools expert.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Captain Dubois. Fingerprint expert.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Detective Bellamy. Fingerprint expert.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Peter Quackenbush. Official photographer.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Doremus. Medical Examiner.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Swacker. Secretary to the District Attorney.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Currie. Vance’s valet.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
